https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Java_Programming/Object_Lifecycle#Creating_object_by_cloning_an_object
Cloning is not automatically available to classes. There is some help though, as all Java objects inherit the protected Object clone() method. This base method would allocate the memory and do the bit by bit copying of the object's states.You may ask why we need this clone method. Couldn't I create a constructor and just passing in the same object, and do the copying variable by variable? Let's see:You might think that accessing the private memberVar variable of obj would fail but as this is in the same class this code is legal. The clone() method copies the whole object's memory in one operation. This is much faster than using the new keyword. Object creation with the new keyword is expensive, so if you need to create lots of objects with the same type, performance will be better if you create one object and clone new ones from it. See below a factory method that will return a new object using cloning.Now, let's see how to make the Customer object cloneable.First the Customer class needs to implement the Cloneable Interface. Override and make the clone() method public, as that is protected in the Object class. Call the super.clone()method at the beginning of your clone method. Override the clone() method in all the subclasses of Customer.In the code listing 4.15 we used cloning for speed up object creation. Another use of cloning could be to take a snapshot of an object that can change in time. Let's say we want to store Customer objects in a collection, but we want to disassociate them from the 'live' objects. So before adding the object, we clone them, so if the original object changes from that point forward, the added object won't. Also let's say that the Customer object has a reference to an Activity object that contains the customer activities. Now we are facing a problem, it is not enough to clone the Customer object, we also need to clone the referenced objects. The solution:Make the Activity class also cloneable Make sure that if the Activity class has other 'changeable' object references, those has to be cloned as well, as seen below Change the Customer class clone() method as follows:Note that only mutable objects needs to be cloned. References to unchangeable objects such as String be used in the cloned object without worry.