The most basic output function is System.out.print(x), where x can be a value or expression of any type. If the parameter, x, is not already a string, it is converted to a value of type String, and the string is then output to the destination called standard output. (Generally, this means that the string is displayed to the user; however, in GUI programs, it outputs to a place where a typical user is unlikely to see it. Furthermore, standard output can be "redirected" to write to a different output destination. Nevertheless, for the type of program that we are working with now, the purpose of System.out is to display text to the user.)

System.out.println(x) outputs the same text as System.out.print, but it follows that text by a line feed, which means that any subsequent output will be on the next line. It is possible to use this function with no parameter, System.out.println(), which outputs nothing but a line feed. Note that System.out.println(x) is equivalent to

System.out.print(x);
System.out.println();
You might have noticed that System.out.print outputs real numbers with as many digits after the decimal point as necessary, so that for example π is output as 3.141592653589793, and numbers that are supposed to represent money might be output as 1050.0 or 43.575. You might prefer to have these numbers output as, for example, 3.14159, 1050.00, and 43.58. Java has a "formatted output" capability that makes it easy to control how real numbers and other values are printed. A lot of formatting options are available. I will cover just a few of the simplest and most commonly used possibilities here.

The function System.out.printf can be used to produce formatted output. (The name "printf," which stands for "print formatted," is copied from the C and C++ programming languages, where this type of output originated.) System.out.printf takes one or more parameters. The first parameter is a String that specifies the format of the output. This parameter is called the format string. The remaining parameters specify the values that are to be output. Here is a statement that will print a number in the proper format for a dollar amount, where amount is a variable of type double:

System.out.printf( "%1.2f", amount );
The output format of a value is specified by a format specifier. In this example, the format specifier is %1.2f. The format string (in the simple cases that I cover here) contains one format specifier for each of the values that is to be output. Some typical format specifiers are %d, %12d, %10s, %1.2f, %15.8e and %1.8g. Every format specifier begins with a percent sign (%) and ends with a letter, possibly with some extra formatting information in between. The letter specifies the type of output that is to be produced. For example, in %d and %12d, the "d" specifies that an integer is to be written. The "12" in %12d specifies the minimum number of spaces that should be used for the output. If the integer that is being output takes up fewer than 12 spaces, extra blank spaces are added in front of the integer to bring the total up to 12. We say that the output is "right-justified in a field of length 12." A very large value is not forced into 12 spaces; if the value has more than 12 digits, all the digits will be printed, with no extra spaces. The specifier %d means the same as %1d -- that is, an integer will be printed using just as many spaces as necessary. (The "d," by the way, stands for "decimal" -- that is, base-10 -- numbers. You can replace the "d" with an "x" to output an integer value in hexadecimal form.)

The letter "s" at the end of a format specifier can be used with any type of value. It means that the value should be output in its default format, just as it would be in unformatted output. A number, such as the "20" in %20s, can be added to specify the (minimum) number of characters. The "s" stands for "string," and it can be used for values of type String. It can also be used for values of other types; in that case the value is converted into a String value in the usual way.

The format specifiers for values of type double are more complicated. An "f", as in %1.2f, is used to output a number in "floating-point" form, that is with digits after a decimal point. In %1.2f, the "2" specifies the number of digits to use after the decimal point. The "1" specifies the (minimum) number of characters to output; a "1" in this position effectively means that just as many characters as are necessary should be used. Similarly, %12.3f would specify a floating-point format with 3 digits after the decimal point, right-justified in a field of length 12.

Very large and very small numbers should be written in exponential format, such as 6.00221415e23, representing "6.00221415 times 10 raised to the power 23." A format specifier such as %15.8e specifies an output in exponential form, with the "8" telling how many digits to use after the decimal point. If you use "g" instead of "e", the output will be in exponential form for very small values and very large values and in floating-point form for other values. In %1.8g, the 8 gives the total number of digits in the answer, including both the digits before the decimal point and the digits after the decimal point.

For numeric output, the format specifier can include a comma (","), which will cause the digits of the number to be separated into groups, to make it easier to read big numbers. In the United States, groups of three digits are separated by commas. For example, if x is one billion, then System.out.printf("%,d",x) will output 1,000,000,000. In other countries, the separator character and the number of digits per group might be different. The comma should come at the beginning of the format specifier, before the field width; for example: %,12.3f. If you want the output to be left-justified instead of right justified, add a minus sign to the beginning of the format specifier: for example, %-20s.

In addition to format specifiers, the format string in a printf statement can include other characters. These extra characters are just copied to the output. This can be a convenient way to insert values into the middle of an output string. For example, if x and y are variables of type int, you could say

System.out.printf("The product of %d and %d is %d", x, y, x*y);
When this statement is executed, the value of x is substituted for the first %d in the string, the value of y for the second %d, and the value of the expression x*y for the third, so the output would be something like "The product of 17 and 42 is 714" (quotation marks not included in output!).

To output a percent sign, use the format specifier %% in the format string. You can use %n to output a line feed. You can also use a backslash, \, as usual in strings to output special characters such as tabs and double quote characters.
